# Uploading WorldBank Data to the Nuvolos Scientific Data Warehouse

## Code description

This is a code blueprint demonstrating how to work access data from a web API in R and then consume this data into the Nuvolos Scientific Data Warehouse (SDW).

* Extract data from a Web API. In particular, we are using the World Bank's World Development Indicators (WDI).
* Perform basic data transformations and plotting on the results of the Web API queries.
* Insert data into the Nuvolos SDW.

Applications in Nuvolos can be extended by [installing software packages](https://docs.nuvolos.cloud/getting-started/work-with-applications/install-a-software-package). In this example we are relying on R's package management system to first install packages. Any installed packages will be retained after the application is restarted. Applications can be distributed to spare the cost of building and installing packages again and again. Distribution's other main benefit is the fact that an application can be proliferated in the exact state it was created in, changing repository layout has no effect on an application that is proliferated via distribution.

### Requirements

It is important to note that the `sf` library requires certain Linux packages if you are building packages from source. Nuvolos-supported images, we have the following compatibility:

| Image      | Compatible |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| RStudio (R 3.6.1)      | No, system libraries not available for building `sf`      |
| RStudio (R 3.6.1) with QuantLib | No, system libraries not available for building `sf`       |
| RStudio + R 3.6.0 + geospatial   | Yes, with minor modifications        |
| RStudio (R 4.0.3) | Yes |
| RStudio (R 4.0.3) for Machine Learning | Yes |

In off-Nuvolos applications, you will need to make sure that you either use pre-built binary versions of the above packages or the system dependencies are satisfied. 

The libraries we are relying on:
* `WDI` - World Bank Data API query package
* `tmap` - topographical map plotting package built on the Grammar of Graphics (similar to `ggplot2`), also provides the `World` dataset used to obtain geometry objects for mapping. The example requires `tmap>=3.3`.
* `sf` - Simple Features for R: encoding spatial vector data
* `spData` - spatial datasets
* `nuvolos` - Interacting with the Nuvolos SDW, implicitly attaches `DBI`.
* `magrittr`, `dplyr` - Simplify data transformations
* `gifski` - In order for `tmap::animation` to be able to generate GIFs

Pulling data can be performed with the WDI package, using the WDI method. The following code pulls the `BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS` series with additional metadata from the year 2000 to 2019.

```
FDI_data <- WDI::WDI(country="all", indicator = "BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS", start = 2000, end = 2019, extra = TRUE)
```

#### Modifying your code for `RStudio + R 3.6.0 + geospatial`

This caveat is only relevant for users of the `RStudio + R 3.6.0 + geospatial` image. By default the image uses the `2019-07-05` MRAN snapshot as the package repository. The resulting installation will provide an outdated `tmap` package version (2.2) on which the code will not function. You can specify a later snapshot date from MRAN to obtain a higher (3.3+) version of `tmap` with which the code will definitely work. For example, instead of the line

```
if (!require("tmap")) install.packages("tmap")
```

use

```
if (!require("tmap")) install.packages("tmap", repos = "https://mran.microsoft.com/snapshot/2021-03-01")
```
 
You can track the availability of the `tmap` package on their [changelog](https://github.com/mtennekes/tmap/blob/master/NEWS) and [release history](https://cran.r-project.org/src/contrib/Archive/tmap/).

### Plotting the data

To smoothen the color scaling of the chart generated by `tmap`, we winsorize the variable first. Setting the `tmap_mode` to `view` enables interactive and animated maps. Finally we generate the plot and save it to a GIF animated plot.

```
merged_data <- merged_data %>% 
  dplyr::mutate(FDI = pmin(pmax(BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS, 
                         quantile(BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS, .05, na.rm=T)), 
                          quantile(BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS, .95, na.rm=T)))
tmap::tmap_mode("view")
FDI_plot <- tmap::tm_shape(merged_data) + 
  tmap::tm_polygons(c("FDI"), style = "cont", title="FDI Net Inflow (GDP %)") +
  tmap::tm_facets(along = "year", free.coords = FALSE)

tmap::tmap_animation(FDI_plot, filename=paste0(getwd(), "/FDI_plot.gif"), delay = 200)
```

### Storing the data in the SDW

In order to load the data to the SDW, in an in-Nuvolos application, you only need to have the following code.

```
con <- nuvolos::get_connection()
dbWriteTable(con, "FDI_GDP_PCT_R", FDI_data %>% dplyr::select(iso3c, year, country, BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS), overwrite=TRUE)
```

This bit needs to be slightly modified if you are working off-Nuvolos (you need to make sure you have the correct credentials), please consult our [documentation](https://docs.nuvolos.cloud/data/access-data-from-applications) on how to do this.

### Adding column or table comments

Adding table and column comments is a nice convenience feature to provide end-users with a light and easy-to-access quick documentation. Please refer to the [service documentation](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql-reference/sql/comment.html) on the details of provide object comments.

In the context of R, sending SQL statements via `DBI::dbExecute` will perform the necessary action. Please note the [escaping and quoting](https://docs.snowflake.com/en/sql-reference/identifiers-syntax.html) of the column names in the statements.

```
dbExecute(con, "COMMENT ON COLUMN FDI_GDP_PCT_R.\"BX.KLT.DINV.WD.GD.ZS\" IS 'Foreign Direct Investment as Pct of GDP'")
dbExecute(con, "COMMENT ON COLUMN FDI_GDP_PCT_R.\"year\" IS 'Time Period'")
dbExecute(con, "COMMENT ON COLUMN FDI_GDP_PCT_R.\"iso3c\" IS '3-Letter ISO Country Code'")
dbExecute(con, "COMMENT ON COLUMN FDI_GDP_PCT_R.\"country\" IS 'Natural English country name'")
dbExecute(con, "COMMENT ON TABLE FDI_GDP_PCT_R IS 'Foreign Direct Investment, Net Inflows (% of GDP)'")
```